[Music]
do
welcome to topcast and episode two of
the science of canon can't by kiara
maletto or rather
my commentary on the science of canon
can't by kiara maletto
and last time in the first episode i
gave a
broad overview of what the science of
canon cart was about
and plucked out a few bits and pieces
from
chapter one it was much broader than
what today is going to be about
i'm still on chapter one however i'm
just going to be focusing on
the physics content of the science of
canon cart chapter one
and that chapter one is of course such
stuff as
dreams are made on and in the previous
episode about this book
it was about the some of the ways in
which
constructor theory might be applied to
many different areas of science and why
this way of conceiving of science as
being about what could possibly occur
and what could not possibly occur
is a new mode of explanation that might
have
useful applications not only to things
like
science and biology but even to aspects
of
our knowledge like art and literature
but today
really the focus is going to be on the
physics
so i'm just going to dive straight into
the book part way through
the chapter and kiara writes
quote a boundary has been generated that
affects
and constrains the way criticism and
conjecture
can occur a boundary that is keeping out
certain kinds of explanations
from the allowed set these are
explanations
that involve counterfactuals the
boundary grew up
because of a phenomenon that has been
going on for some time
silently largely unnoticed like water
seeping into a ship whose hull has a
hidden hole below the water line
to see what it is we must start where it
all began
we must start with physics
it is perhaps ironic that this boundary
generating phenomenon started in physics
because physics
is one of the clearest examples of how
thinking can produce knowledge and make
rapid progress
at a glance from what one is taught in
elementary courses at school
physics may appear like a collection of
tools to solve
irrelevant problems of the kind you get
in weekly physics tests
what is the time of flight of an apple
that falls from a tree of a certain
height
how long will it take a bathtub of such
a volume to be filled with water
if the water is flowing in at this rate
and so on
compared with other disciplines such as
literature or philosophy
physics may not seem to be about deep
things at all
who cares after all about how an apple
falls isn't that fantastically narrow in
scope
this first impression is very far from
the truth physics is a dazzling
firework display it is profound
beautiful and illuminating
a source of never-ending delight physics
is about solving problems in our
understanding of reality
by formulating explanations that fill
gaps in our previous understanding
the point of physics is not the
particular calculation
about the fall of an apple it is the
explanation behind
it which unifies all motions that of the
apple
with that of a planet in the solar
system and beyond
the dazzling stuff consists of
explanations for they surprise us
by revealing things that were previously
unknown
and very distant from our intuition with
the aim of solving a particular problem
as i said problems always consist of a
contrast or clash between ideas about
the world
for example in the past people believed
that the earth was at the center of the
universe
but that notion clashed irredeemably
with observations
such as those about the apparent
movement of the stars of the other
planets
and of the moon this led copernicus and
galileo to conjecture
that the sun not the earth was at the
center of the solar system
the copernican revolution was an
astonishing change of perspective
which allowed us to make formidable
progress in understanding astronomy
and celestial mechanics and eventually
led via a series
of further steps to our current space
exploration enterprises
pausing there my reflection on this now
it might be if you're paying careful
attention to some of my
podcasts here it might seem that there
is a contradiction
in what i say about this kind of thing
here
what kiara refers to as the copernican
revolution
what historians refer to as the
copernican revolution what many
people refer to as the copernican
revolution but one of the reasons
why it's referred to as the copernican
revolution is because
it is supposed to be revolutionary
but i wouldn't take the word revolution
too
seriously the sociologist philosopher
science scientist and physicist thomas
wrote a book
called the structure of scientific
revolutions
where he sought to explain that progress
in science
progress in scare quotes to some extent
was a story of
revolutions the overturning of
particular frameworks
and if you're in one framework or
paradigm one way of understanding the
world
and it was very difficult for you to
understand any other way of conceiving
that the world could operate in other
words science was always a sociological
battle this this battle between the old
fogies and the new upstarts
and there's no real objective way of
determining
who is correct on this account but
rather it is a political battle
between the old and the young lions
battling it out
and just having arguments that are
filled with emotion and filled with
politics
rather than objectively looking at the
facts and coming to a
deeper understanding of the world the
copernican revolution
as chiara says there is certainly an
astonishing change of perspective
because we went from conceiving of
ourselves as human beings
occupying a planet at the center of the
universe
every other celestial body orbiting
around us
what copernicus and others
saw was that the better explanation the
better scientific explanation
was to shift the earth from the center
to having the sun at the center
heliocentrism now on one hand this isn't
an astonishing change of perspective
certainly mentally for people
however the scientific theory
the scientific theory that goes on to
explain orbital motions of celestial
objects
didn't change that much because we still
had orbits
things were still moving in approximate
circles or ellipses
there was still relative motion between
these objects the difference was
an incremental change from having one
object
center to having a different object at
the center on the one hand
the earth then the sun now
we can debate about what it would mean
for that to be revolutionary
but the usual understanding of
revolution is a complete
overturning of everything but not
everything was overturned
and so we could make a pretty strong
counter argument that
this wasn't really a revolution it was a
copernican
incremental change the existing
understanding of the universe
but it was but it still was an
astonishing change of perspective
but scientifically speaking it allowed
us to correct certain errors
in the way in which eventually allowed
us to correct certain areas in the way
in which
planetary motions operated but people
who follow
in the intellectual tradition of thomas
kern
like to make a big deal about changes
like this
they formulate an entire view of science
which is
there are those who believed in the
copernican idea you know
those who believe in the ptolemaic idea
and there was just no way that these two
groups of people could
communicate with one another they're
operating completely different paradigms
but were they were they really operating
in completely different paradigms
after all the content of both theories
remained relatively unchanged it was
just the object the center was the thing
that
changed it was an incremental change i
would suggest
following in papa's intellectual
tradition
if on the other hand we have gone from a
ptolemaic view to a copernican view
where
there were no such things as orbits
there were no such things as planets
there was no relative motion between the
celestial objects
if all of it was utterly overturned then
i could get it then i could understand
that
maybe this would be revolutionary but in
fact
so much of the theory was maintained and
this is true between
classical mechanics and quantum
mechanics as well that's a bigger change
that's a much bigger change of
perspective
and much more of the content actually
changes as well but much
much is preserved and as chiara says
in exactly the same sentence where she
says that the copernican revolution was
an astonishing change of perspective
it then led via a series of further
steps
to our current space exploration
enterprises so it's
it's always this story of steps these
incremental steps
it's very hard to leap to something
utterly
different where you're just giving up
everything that you knew
previously and coming up with a theory
that that in no way
contains any of the content of the
previous theory it typically does
it typically does we go from having a
force of gravity to no force of gravity
but lots of stuff still remains the same
mass is still involved for example
energy is still involved
for example orbits still happen for
example
back to the book chiara rights quote
by solving problems of that kind
physicists have gradually uncovered
entirely unsuspected worlds telling us a
deeper layer of the story of how things
are
these layers are beyond the immediate
reach of our senses
but our mind can visualize them in the
light of explanations
in existing physics all explanations
have some primitive elements
in terms of which the physical reality
to be explained is expressed
the appearance of the dark sky at night
is a perfect example of that
it can be explained in terms of the
unexpected underlying
phenomena involving things like photons
the remarkable fact that the universe is
expanding and so on
none of those elements is apparent in
the sky itself but they are all part of
the explanation for why it
looks the way it does in terms of what
is really out there
explanations are accounts of what is
seen in terms of
mostly unseen elements pausing their my
reflection
so this is a common thread
now that runs through the work of karl
popper
david deutsch chiara maletto that we
have this conception of science
almost everything as i like to say
interesting that we know about science
is the scene what we can observe
in terms of the unseen what we cannot
observe and i've been at pains
in my conversations on that other
podcast and various other places with
naval ravicant
to explain and try and promote this idea
that almost everything in science is not
about
what we can observe directly and it is
very well encapsulated by this idea of
explaining
the scene in terms of the unseen and so
if we can go through
the standard examples again david's
favorite example being
that of dinosaurs we do not observe
dinosaurs they're unseen what we observe
are fossils in the ground those fossils
in the ground
that exist in rocks are essentially
patterns in rocks that we have to
interpret
and then a chain of explanatory
interpretations
leads us to the conclusion that once
upon a time
more than 62 million years ago walk the
earth
these huge creatures that we call
dinosaurs that we do not observe
and then unless we build time machines
or we have significantly more advanced
genetic engineering
we will not see with our eyes instead
we must imagine this is part of the
explanatory theory
that explains why fossils exist
the cause of the fossils is these unseen
things
and so now we can change that to i like
to use
stellar nucleosynthesis stellar nuclear
fusion
we we cannot travel to the center of a
star to the core
of a star like the sun in fact there are
good physical reasons why
it is impossible for us to directly
observe
anything at the core of the sun we
cannot send a probe there there is no
material
that can survive the journey to the
center of the sun we can't even send
things to the center of the earth
much less the center of the sun any
material out of which you think you
could make a probe
the most the strongest titanium tungsten
alloy
isn't going to make it even to the
surface of the sun before the thing
entirely melts and then vaporizes
we're not going to get to the center of
the sun but we know
what's going on there we cannot see
what's going on there directly
all we do is collect photons of light
here at earth
and interpret those photons of light and
by
a chain of explanation and
interpretation
we conclude oh there's hydrogen there at
the center of the sun
protons those protons those hydrogen
nuclei
are being smashed together with
sufficient energy that they
fuse forming helium and that process
releases heat and light and that's what
we detect and
the explanation of the light here at
earth is because
of that process going on the core of the
sun which we cannot see
the big bang is another fantastic one
that we will never see the big bang
we cannot be there to observe it no one
was there to observe it
no one ever will be there to observe it
but it happened
so we are explaining what we see now
the cosmic microwave background the
so-called hubble expansion of the
universe the the
the red shift of galaxies and the ratio
of hydrogen to helium and indeed the
dark night sky
all of these things are explained by
this unseen thing
the big bang choose your favorite
example from science
from modern science and you will quickly
realize that
there is a part of the explanation which
relies upon
unseen things going on
the problem of course is in the scene we
we end up
observing something and we go we can't
explain this observation what is going
on here
the observation causes us to think well
that doesn't make sense in light of this
so let's try to come up with an
explanation and the explanation
falls back towards things that we cannot
observe
it's a very fascinating part of science
it's a different way of conceiving of
science by the way
anyone who describes himself as an
empiricist
would have to explain what's going on
here because empiricism
is the misconception that science is
only about the things that we can
observe do you need to
prove this scientific theory
by recourse to observations in the world
but that's not the way that science
works because again
the vast majority of interesting stuff
in science is about the unseen or the
unobserved
okay let's go back to the book and kiara
writes
there is no limitation in principle to
how deep one can go in finding
even more primitive elements the
primitive elements of an explanation
can always be explained further in terms
of other entities and so on going deeper
and deeper deeper levels of explanation
may look
very different from the shallower ones
for instance there was a time in physics
when particles were thought to be the
ultimate elements of reality
these are discrete lumps of matter
interacting with each other
via forces at a distance that view was
then overturned by the idea of fields
a field in physics is a thing that that
permeates everything there is in a
continuous way
particles are now understood as
excitations ripples
of fields but fields themselves could in
principle be broken down further into
more primitive elements of explanation
opening up a novel and even more
fundamental explanation of reality
this may be hard to imagine for us but
we must be prepared to imagine more
fundamental entities
than fields given that physics is open
to further more fundamental explanations
the resulting picture of scientific
knowledge is that there are different
levels of explanation about reality
each of these levels may sometimes be
autonomous in the sense that it does not
need to refer
to the others to make sense of its own
internal rules
for example it is still fine to think of
particles without referring to fields if
you wish to describe certain simple
mechanical interactions
such as the collision of two rigid
spheres
none of these levels is exhaustive all
the levels are essential to
understanding what is out there
pausing that is my quick reflection on
this so
when it comes to a word like particles i
like to think that we just
continue to understand the nature of a
particle
with ever more precision over time and
there'll be no end to how well we can
understand
particles take for example the electron
now it used to be thought that the
electron well
aside from the fact it used to be
thought the electron didn't exist
that they were just these things called
atoms and they were just spheres
that were just indivisible spheres we
can go back to democritus in ancient
greece for that
it took some time later until we thought
that well the electron is actually this
charged particle that orbits the nucleus
in an atom
the atom now being something that is
indeed divisible made up of
other simpler components and then we
realized well the electron might be the
excitation of the field
but it didn't change the fact the
electron is an electron and i don't
think it changed the fact that a
particle is a particle
unless one is to insist that particle
must mean
something other than excitation of the
field in the same way that we do not
need to agree
with the ancient greeks democritus
doesn't get to claim the word
atom and keep it for all time we can
refine our understanding of the word
atom over time
and come to have a better deeper
understanding of what an atom genuinely
is
it's not something that's indivisible
even if the greek word means
indivisible so too with an electron and
now we know an electron
excitation of the field but also
consisting of
lots of fungible instances of itself
throughout the multiverse
we should expect that this understanding
of the electron will just continue to be
refined
could it ever be the case that we would
find an explanation where the electron
was entirely able to be done away with
i doubt it but it's possible it's
possible
are we wrong about the electron right
now i would certainly expect that to be
the case
that we can find out something new about
the electron namely some new properties
that we didn't know about before
all of these things are true but i
emphasize that because
certainly in episodes that i've done on
the multiverse i've said categorically
that the electron is not a wave
in a single universe that i uh refuse to
go down the path of saying an electron
is both a particle and a wave
i say it's a particle then of course we
get into this idea that it's an
excitation the field
the field being a continuous thing
across
a universe does that then mean that the
electron is a particle in the wave
only if i would suggest only if you take
into account
a god's eye view of the entire
multiverse seen across the entire
multiverse
the electron might seem to be a
continuous
thing of a kind and at the same time in
any given universe
it is going to be a discrete thing as
well
i think we need to be precise about
what level of explanation we're talking
about within the single
approximately single universe or across
the entire multiverse
anyways that is just to give my little
opinion that
electrons are particles but we can come
to understand what the word
particle means to a
deeper more refined way over time
back to the book ciara writes quote
the usual output of knowledge creation
in physics is a piece of knowledge that
addresses
a particular problem for example the
explanation for why the sky appears dark
at night
the explanation for why the sun appears
to move in the sky from east to west
every day
and so on from time to time such problem
solving leads to an entirely new
physical theory
such as newtonian mechanics general
relativity or quantum theory
these rare events have momentous
consequences
resulting in a radical change in the way
we look at the world
which may take several decades to be
assimilated often
a new physical theory's practical and
theoretical implications
can be worked out only after a long
while for example
nothing in einstein's theory of general
relativity even hinted at gps
the global positioning system which
provides information about location and
time to our phones and cars
using a network of satellites orbiting
earth yet gps relies directly on the
phenomena
described by general relativity the
possibility
of gps is a counterfactual allowed by
general relativity
that's why a new physical theory is much
more than a solution
to a particular problem it is a
conjectured explanation
that attempts to approximate the actual
laws of physics
the rules that constrain everything in
our universe
if you ask their physicists to write
down what we currently know about the
laws of physics
they would probably start writing a
bunch of equations for example
e equals m c squared but then they would
think again they would start adding
words to explain what those various
symbols mean
e is energy m is mass c is the speed of
light and so on
and they would explain in words what
energy mass speed and light are
all those words constitute the
explanation that is the core content of
the physical theory
that those equations express the two
ingredients are
indissoluble without explanations an
equation is empty and has no meaning
without formulae the explanation is too
vague to be applied
a physical theory therefore is not just
the set of its formulae such as z equals
m c
squared nor is it the collection of its
testable predictions
it is a conjectured explanation which
includes for example the informal
descriptions of what e
m and c are in that formula and why they
are related in that way
this will also apply to things that
unlike the speed of light
cannot be directly measured such as the
geometry space time
which are nevertheless crucial to
explain why that formula which is then
relevant
to make predictions is as it is in
practice
physical theories about the universe
that count as viable explanations
must at least have certain traits that
guarantee they are free of basic flaws
just pausing pausing my reflection so
here the idea that
the you know a theory is
just a solution to a problem or a
solution to a particular problem
it reeks of the instrumentalist idea
that's as long as you have
equations then what you can do is
predict the outcome of experiments
i think this is what's being hinted at
here but in fact
if you're not an instrumentalist if you
are a realist
then what you say is that the theories
we have are approximations to
what is really out there in some sense
and in the case of physics
the conjectured explanations we have are
approximations to the ultimate laws of
physics
that are definitely there governing the
universe in some way now if you're an
instrumentalist again then what you
would say is
well e equals m c squared just allows
you to predict
the outcome of i don't know a nuclear
bomb explosion
how much energy you'll get without ever
being without ever worrying about
um well how do you how do you then even
talk about energy you don't have to
explain what energy is a realist
wants to explain what energy actually is
would actually say well m means mass and
i'll tell you what mass is and c means
the speed of light and i'll tell you
what that means as well
you know that this this entire grand
theory the general and special theory of
relativity
are actually describing stuff that's out
there in the real world it's not just
to generate equations which then allow
us to
predict the outcome of an experiment we
need to have something more than that we
need to have
contact with physical entities
in the real world that is how the
explanation is cashed out
we need both as chiari says we need both
the
formula the equations because that gives
us precision
in being able to make some predictions
that's very very crucially important
but we also need an explanation in words
of what the different parts of the
equation actually refer
to and in that case we have energy being
referred to mass being referred to speed
of light being referred to
now we're about to get into something a
little new a
new little piece of terminology and this
is exciting for me because it's in
epistemology and it's about
the nature of an exact
theory so let's go to that kiara writes
quote in practice physical theories
about the universe that counters viable
explanations
must at least have certain traits that
guarantee they are free of
basic flaws in the first place they must
be
exact by exact theory i do not mean
expressible precisely in mathematical
terms or anything like that
i mean a theory that does not include
any limitation as to the accuracy of its
statements
in short one that does not include any
approximation
think of two recipes for a cake one
requiring that you put
approximately 100 grams of sugar in a
bowl
the other requiring that you put in
exactly 100 grams of sugar
the first is an approximate recipe in
that 99 grams or 101 grams
will probably do the second is an exact
one
just as with recipes approximations in
physical theories are vague
as to what they say about physical
reality and for that reason
they are problematic for example in
regard to those recipes one could ask
why approximately 100 grams of sugar
and not exactly 99. an example of an
exact physical theory
is newtonian physics which allows one to
predict the exact
place and time of an apple's landing on
the ground once we know when
and where it comes off the tree and its
initial velocity
newtonian physics is also an example of
the most general kind of theory
in that it is universal a universal
theory is one that is not subject
to any limitation about its domain of
applicability
newton's theory applies to apples on
earth and on mars
and in any other alien place in the
universe pausing there
my reflection let's do an example
let's do this one let's figure out you
know in a
a science book like this i think it's
recommended by editors or something like
this there's this saying that goes
around
for every equation that you put into a
book like this
your number of readers is reduced by
half or something like that i don't know
anyways i don't care i'm making a
youtube
or a podcast and so i can i can put
equations here and i can do
a little bit of baby level physics
so let's do that let's actually do the
upper one but before before
we get to the upper one i'll do
something even simpler
so let me put something up on the screen
here here's an equation okay so this
equation here
is v equals u plus 18. let me explain
what each of the parts here mean this is
one of the
so-called suvat equations s-u-v-a-t
which high school physics students are
unfortunately
forced to learn or you know if they're
in higher enough years they can elect to
learn
the souvvat equations are part of
newtonian
classical mechanics they don't work
universally as it turns out
now they're purported to be universal
and newton would have thought they were
universal
but in fact they don't apply because we
have this thing called relativity and
there's an upper limit on how high v
can be v is your final velocity v is
your final velocity
u stands for your initial velocity a
stands for your acceleration and t is
the time over which you are
accelerating now where on earth did this
come from well on the one hand you might
think it's common sense depending upon
how mathematically minded you are you
might look at that and think well of
course my final velocity v
is going to be how fast i'm now
traveling u
plus how long i'm going to accelerate
for so that can be common sense
but in fact it comes from here the
definition of what acceleration is
acceleration is the change in the
velocity
over the change in time so it's about
the change in velocity that's what
acceleration is it's how
much you are speeding up slowing down
changing your direction that kind of
thing
now we can that that way of writing it
there is a
equals delta v over delta t the delta is
just the greek letter which means
change in some change in velocity over a
change in time
change in velocity is the take away u
your
final velocity take away your initial
velocity and that's all over
your delta t how long what duration of
time you happen to be accelerating for
so let's let's consider an example let's
say that right now you're in a car and
you're traveling at 10 meters per second
now i know that most people don't talk
in terms of meters per second
but um physicists they like to talk in
meters per second rather than
miles per hour or kilometers per hour we
talk in meters per second
let's so we're traveling at 10 meters
per second let's assume that we
depress the accelerator in our car and
we accelerate at a rate of 2 meters per
second that's reasonable for a car
and we're going to accelerate we're
going to leave our foot on the
accelerator
at a constant rate of acceleration
that's the important thing as well
many cars don't accelerate at a constant
rate but we're going to presume
constant rate and we're going to do that
for a time of 5 seconds so we're going
to put the accelerator down for 5
seconds
we're going to be moving at initially 10
meters a second and accelerating
for 2 meters a second then how fast are
we going at the end of this 5 seconds
well
this is the math that we do we want to
figure out what v
is so v is going to equal u plus a t
and knowing that u is and i'm going to
add to that
two times five two times five is ten
so the acceleration over those five
seconds
has added another ten meters a second to
my initial velocity
so i've got 10 meters a second plus
another 10 meters a second
altogether v my final velocity is 20
meters a second
so this is what we would call an example
of a kind of dynamical law where we've
got some initial conditions
my initial conditions were 10 meters a
second
two meters per second per second was my
acceleration
over a time period of five seconds
putting all of those initial conditions
together i can then make a prediction
of what my final velocity is going to be
so this is a way of
conceiving of how physics is done and
almost all physics
is little more than an example of this
hitherto by the way without constructor
theory so here the two
we have equations we plug in the initial
conditions and then
we can predict whatever future state of
the system that you want so in this case
our very
simple system of the car presuming that
relativity doesn't exist in the universe
presuming we live in a
a a universe governed by newtonian
physics
then i can tell you what your final
velocity of v is going to be
if only you can tell me what the initial
conditions are
what u is what a is and what t is so
this is
supposedly how physics is done give me a
law of physics
like v equals u plus a t tell me what
the initial conditions are
and then i will tell you i'll predict
any future state of the system
at whatever time you like now let's have
a look at kiara's example there
an example of an exact physical theory
she says
is one like newtonian physics which
allows one to predict the exact place
and time of an apples landing
on the ground once we know when and
where
it comes off the tree and its initial
velocity okay so
in this case i'll use a different
equation it's another
one of these suvard equations if you're
interested then
then you can look up where you get an
equation like this
it's a little bit more complicated than
the previous one but the equation is
this
s equals u t plus half a t squared
and all those symbols mean exactly the
same as what they did in the previous
one
with the addition of s s is the
displacement
or where something is happening so s is
the displacement u just like before is
the initial speed of the object
t is the time taken and a is the
acceleration
now if we have an object like an apple
sitting on a tree
then it's initial speed is u it's just
sitting there
and what we're interested in is finding
out s how far it's going to fall
now if you tell me t if you time you're
standing there with a stopwatch or
something
next to the apple tree timing how long
it takes
for that apple to hit the ground then i
will be able to tell you s
how far it has fallen where it's going
to hit the ground
now it's going to hit the ground of
course immediately beneath the tree but
where exactly is the ground well that's
the problem that we can set out so let's
let's make a guess
let's presume you're standing there with
your stopwatch and it takes precisely
one second one second for that apple
to hit the ground then what do we
predict for s well s
is going to be s equals u t plus half a
t
squared but in this case our u is zero
now u is zero so that term u times
t is going to also be zero because it
doesn't matter what t is
t in this case happens to be one zero
times anything is
zero so we've got s equals zero plus a
half
a t squared now what's a ah a is the
acceleration now
the acceleration in this case is the
acceleration due
to gravity the acceleration due to
gravity on earth
which is taken as roughly speaking a
constant all over the surface of the
earth let's presume we're at sea level
and the acceleration due to gravity
there is approximately
9.81 meters per second squared
and by the way this changes around the
world just ever so slightly and can use
the fact that it changes around the
world
to do something called gravity analysis
is what geophysicists do and you can
find things in the ground and that's a
whole
area of science but let's go back to
this s equals ut plus half a t squared
we've got s equals 0 plus a half times
9.81 now we know plus a half times 9.81
times
t squared times how long did we say
1 times 1 squared so now we've got s
equals 0 plus a half 9.81 times
1 squared which is 1. so that's half of
9.81 call it
half of 10 so it's a little bit under
five it's actually about
4.9 so the tree must have been
4.9 meters high that's how far
the apple fell so 4.9 s equals 4.9 so we
found out
where the apple fell so you can play
around with that yourself if you've
never seen anything like this before
that too is a kind well that equation is
derived
from the laws of physics the newtonian
laws of physics as we presume the laws
of physics
would be if we lived in a universe
governed by for example
newton's law of gravity but now we know
that we're not in that
kind of universe that by the way that
that works perfectly well and the reason
why newtonian mechanics is still taught
still learned is because
for almost all engineering purposes
newtonian physics works perfectly well
you can get to the moon with newtonian
physics like this
it is precise enough to be able to
approximately get the right answer when
i say approximately i mean
with high precision once you start to
get to really high velocities
close to the speed of light then the
thing starts to break down
then it doesn't work so well then you
want to rely upon
relativity einstein's relativity but
that is beyond the scope
of even my podcasting okay so just to
summarize all of this
all i'm doing here is just showing you
the traditional way in which
physics has always been done you have
an explanation a a an explanation of how
the world works
in terms of forces perhaps things like
quantities like
acceleration and time gravity
and so on and from this explanation a a
scientist someone like newton
is able to derive from certain
principles from certain things that he
understands about reality assumes about
reality
guesses to be approximately correct
about reality he then is able to
derive from that explanation certain
equations which represent some aspect of
those physical laws
v equals u plus a t s equals ut plus
half a t
squared and we can regard that s equals
u2 plus half a t squared for example
or v equals u plus a t as a dynamical
law certainly has an equation
representing a dynamical law of some
kind
and if we know the initial conditions
the numbers
that we plug into the equation we're
able to make a prediction of what will
happen in the future
this is the sense in which physics has
always been done
and even if you get into relativity it's
the same idea
okay the equations change but it's the
same idea if you get into quantum theory
it's the same idea
things get more complicated in terms of
the formalism as we say the the
mathematical equations become more
complicated we have
all sorts of weird and interesting
calculus going on
and matrices going on and then and in
certain cases
statistics happening but it's the same
it is where we have an equation of some
kind
and we take some numbers that we know
the initial conditions
and we predict what is going to happen
in the future we're finding our v
given our u our a and our t it's
basically that idea until now
back to the book chiara rights again
physical theories that are not universal
and apply only to some scales or domains
are by themselves problematic because
one still has to explain why they hold
only at that scale and not elsewhere
so by tentatively solving problems in
our understanding of physical reality
physics ends up seeking universal and
exact physical theories
these theories as i shall explain in
chapter 2 and 7 must also be testable
so that they can be checked against
reality to find
potential errors because of fallibilism
it is important to note here that exact
does not at all mean true any
conjectured explanation which seems to
be working may be found to be false
at any time as i said this happened with
newton's theory of gravitation when it
was superseded by quantum gravity and
general relativity
we can never know whether a physical
theory that we have formulated
is true all we can say is that it has so
far not been found to be false
this may seem a little unsettling but it
is an extremely interesting fact about
how knowledge is created
and as i said it is central to the
possibility of making progress
via criticism here we get closer to the
origin
of the pernicious boundary to exclude
counterfactuals
as one can imagine there are different
ways in which explanations can be
formulated
how many we do not know infinitely many
presumably
the mode of explanation of newton's
theory has a distinctive feature
its scope is confined to explaining what
happens in the universe
given two primitive elements one
includes what in physics jargon are
called
laws of motion the rules that tell us
how
the motion of systems what physicists
call the dynamics
unfolds in space and time the other are
the specific initial conditions of the
motion
for example newton's laws of motion can
be applied to say what happens to an
apple given the initial conditions
the particular place where the apple
started its motion and its initial
velocity
the set of points that a system goes
through as it moves is called
a trajectory hit a tennis ball with a
racket against the wall
the trajectory is the imaginary line one
can draw to describe where the ball goes
after it leaves your racket
the laws of motion and the initial
condition give us a way to predict that
trajectory without
actually having to observe any actual
ball being hit
given the initial position and velocity
of the ball one can predict precisely
where its motion will bring it
just computing the trajectory from the
laws of motion
this mode of explaining things in terms
of what happens
has proved extremely successful and
far-reaching it allows for powerful
predictions
which can be tested with experiments to
enable conjecture and criticism
the mode continued to be successful even
when newton's theory was found to be
inadequate
by for instance failing to describe the
precession of the planet mercury
it delivered theories like quantum
theory and general relativity which are
our current best theories to explain
physical reality
both of these subtle theories are
formulated as laws of motion
it is the very same mode of explanation
that newton adopted in forming
his laws along with much progress this
mode of explanation
has perversely generated the wretched
boundaries
that could stand in the way of future
successors an
unspoken stipulation was made what i
shall call
the traditional conception of
fundamental physics
that all fundamental physical theories
must be formulated
in terms of predictions about what
happens in the universe given the
initial
or more generally supplementary
conditions and laws of motion
in this conception physics is no longer
an open-ended enterprise
it has been infinitely narrowed to the
project of finding theories that can be
expressed only in terms of what happens
in the universe
given the laws of motion of all its
constituents and a particular initial
condition
so the ultimate theory about physical
reality would consist of a collection of
the trajectories
of all elementary particles in the
universe given where
and when they started we do not have
such a theory yet
but it is traditionally regarded
hypothetically as the ultimate
explanation
of everything important about the
universe pausing there just my
reflection
okay so in my very baby example of
vehicles u plus a t
for example you could apply this to
in theory okay if you're this oracle or
a god or some sort of super intelligence
whatever you want to call it
that's got access to some kind of system
where you know
the current velocity of any particular
particle throughout the entire universe
you know what its acceleration might be
which is a consequence of the forces
that might be applied to it
then if you just pick some time t in the
future
then you will know what v is going to be
now of course there are lots of
complications here namely
that you won't have a constant
acceleration let's say
putting aside the fact that of course
the universe doesn't even obey v equals
u plus a t
because we know that relativity and
quantum theory
uh for two examples uh contradict what
is being said here but
in principle you get the idea that if
you accept the
the notion that there are these
dynamical laws that if you have the
initial conditions dynamical laws such
as vehicles u plus a t
then if you just plug in these initial
conditions
you allow for the prediction at any
point in the future at any time t
in the future of the state that it
evolves to
this is the concept of determinism and
so
this leads to all sorts of poor
philosophical arguments i would suggest
as well as this narrowing of the
conception of what physics could
potentially be about
and it seems to in so far as we regard
this as being a universal
truth about physical reality it rules
out all sorts of things
and this is why it leads to this poverty
of
philosophical explanations and other
kind of explanations we can't get
beneath
this notion of this kind of determinism
so we rule out things like free will for
example some people rule that choose to
rule out free will and we're going to
come to this
at various points throughout the
discussion of this book it's a it's a
pet peeve of mine because free will to
me
apart from just describing what humans
do what people do people make choices in
the world
but it's also a label for a certain kind
of mystery
and there is a mystery there really are
mysteries out there in the universe
there are so many things we don't know
we're at the beginning of infinity but
if you think that we already have
everything wrapped up neatly
in terms of dynamical laws and initial
conditions which allow us to
predict at any any point in the future
what's going to happen
then we have a deterministic universe
that rules out all other
possible mysteries in the universe after
all isn't everything already
predetermined therefore there are no
mysteries in the universe there are no
open questions all we need to do
is to plug into some supercomputer of
the future or consult some oracle
about what's going to happen and that
apparently solves everything no that
merely predicts everything
and prediction is not the purpose of
science or knowledge production in
general
what we're after are explanations and
even if this conception of physics this
dynamical laws and initial conditions
thing
was true which were about to say
isn't the best way of conceiving of
science
not the best way of considering
conceiving of physics let alone science
and i would say probably knowledge more
broadly
even if we were to conceive of science
being like this
it it presumes far too much it presumes
everything can be explained
in terms of physics well it doesn't even
explain it
it dismisses explanation it says that
everything's about prediction
and this is not the purpose of science
and it's an unfortunate
thing that's entered the culture the
intellectual culture
one would say that comment people who
commented on newton
thought that it revealed a clockwork
universe and therefore
ruled out every other interesting
emergent
aspect of reality after all if it's just
a clockwork universe
then there's no place in it for
mysteries like consciousness and free
will
things that might not easily
sit within this framework of determinism
many of us say
it does it does anyway free will isn't
at all
affected by determinism but anyway
what we're about to get to here one
reason i love constructive theory
is because all of this argument about
determinism is predicated very much on
the idea that
it's true anyway that dynamical laws
and initial conditions are the whole
truth of the matter
that there isn't a misconception lurking
there that there isn't a deeper way of
understanding physics
and there is and we're about to find out
what it is and besides that
besides that and we're about to come to
this presently
the initial conditions dynamical laws
thing doesn't explain
why the initial conditions are the way
that they are why are the initial
conditions are the way they are look
how do we how did we get to this state
in the first place and if you just say
the big bang
why is the big bang the way that it is
or was
there's no explanation there's no way of
even conceiving
of that within the present framework
nothing within that present framework of
dynamical laws of initial conditions
can explain why the initial condition
should be the way that they are
you can't refer to anything within
that framework to give you the bits of
the framework why are the physical laws
the way that they are
silent on that these just other physical
laws why are the initial conditions the
way that they are
silent on that that's just the way
things are constructor theory is the
first time as far as i can tell
that we've got an area in physics which
is going
to provide a window into allowing us
to peer into answers possible answers
about that let's go back to the book
where kiara writes
that traditional conception has created
the barriers against counterfactual
explanations
and its project if taken literally
appears impossible
in the first place it is not possible to
explain literally everything in terms of
initial conditions and laws of motion
for example even if we had a decent
theory of what the initial conditions of
the universe are
it could not itself be explained in
terms of initial conditions
for a start it would have to contemplate
what would happen
if other initial conditions were chosen
a kind of factual explanation
how to explain the choice of the initial
conditions is indeed an open problem in
fundamental physics
there are also other related open issues
that require that counterfactuals be
addressed
such as the problem of fine-tuning the
laws of physics
about why dynamical laws are as they are
for an excellent exposition of this
problem see paul davies the goldilocks
enigma
the fine-tuning problem cannot be
addressed by stating only what happens
one has necessarily to look at what
might have happened if the laws had been
different
and how can one do that without
counterfactuals in addition
explaining what we see now in the
universe around us in terms of the story
that starts with initial conditions
is itself arbitrary one could describe
everything that happens including what
we see now
given the final conditions of the
universe and then use the laws of motion
backwards
by retrodicting instead of predicting
the current state of affairs
pausing there my reflection um uh yeah
this this retro addicting
versus predicting uh very true you know
given any state of motion you can
predict
um what the conditions are using
dynamical laws at any point in the
future of the past
many of us just choose the word
predicting to as a general term
even predicting what happened in the
past
is still a form of prediction you know
that um predicting for example
what the conditions that the big bang
would like rather than saying uh we
retro
what it was like at the big bang we'll
just predict even though we're talking
about the past
now that aside um fine tuning yes paul
davies did write this
excellent book the goldilocks enigma
since then there have
been uh other books uh
what one one book was a fallacy the
fallacy of fine tuning by
victor stinger who is a participant and
he does very well to explain
aspects of fine-tuning but then he
dismisses them all and says that this is
not a problem that's a very
interesting book in response to that
book largely in response to that book
not only but largely in response to that
book
a couple of aussie physicists
now one is a theoretical physicist who
moved into cosmology his name is
grant lewis and another is a
an astrophysicist in cosmology as well
luke barnes
and they wrote a book called a fortunate
universe life in a finely tuned cosmos
and that's a really interesting book
because the two authors there
are coming at the issue from very
different positions
grant lewis is an atheist luke barnes
is not an atheist i think he comes from
a
christian tradition and you know they
both try and nut out the
debate in a very friendly good-natured
humorous way
and they explain all the modern problems
i think it's one of the more
very very recent books written on this
2016 it was published
you can get the audio book as well or
just look up
especially luke barnes but also grant
lewis
on youtube there's just some really
fascinating
lectures they give both of them have
been on closer to truth that wonderful
series of interviews with uh robert
lawrence kuhn
so you can find that and find that here
and so i personally i
love i'm fascinated by this fine-tuning
issue basically because uh
we know nothing we know
so little and in lewis and barnes
they don't push a particular
perspective even though i say you know
barnes comes from this
christian tradition he uses it
as a way of critiquing uh
other ways of trying to explain or
explain away the fine-tuning problem
mainly via
a megaverse and grant lewis
uses uh his arguments to try and explain
away the supernatural explanation so
they're using they're very much in uh
even though they wouldn't call
themselves papyrians i'm
almost certain of that i think they're
bayesians that aside
um they they use their ideas as
very much as critiques of one another
and ultimately come to the conclusion
that well there are just many many many
open questions
when it comes to this whole area of fine
tuning and the physical constants
much much less to say well you could
have different physical laws as well
now in the next part we're going to
bring this
new theory of physics which shows
promise
in providing new avenues within physics
to answer
age old problems in physics with
an appeal to epistemology
let's go back to the book chiara rights
the traditional conception is also
perverse
because it clashes with the pillars of
rational thinking which i mentioned
early on
that of being changeable and improvable
via
conjecture and criticism physics aims at
solving problems
as a consequence it seeks if possible
universal and exact
testable laws formulated in whatever
mode of explanation happens to be
appropriate
in contrast the traditional conception
forces theories to come
only in one form thus narrowing down the
space
available for thinking it introduces a
boundary which impedes progress
it confines physics only to things that
can be described
exactly in terms of statements about
what happens given the initial
conditions
and laws of motion but not about other
phenomena which thus remain
only imperfectly explained there is more
the traditional conception of physics
has inspired an approach
that has now spread to other parts of
science
too viran approach that has been called
reductionism the idea that there is only
one level of explanation that is both
fundamental
and admissible and everything else can
be reduced to that
such a level of explanation is
presumably
that of elementary particles or fields
and their trajectories
given their initial conditions but this
take on physical reality is again
too narrow there are questions that this
approach cannot answer
questions that are deep and important
for understanding the full reality of a
physical phenomenon
for instance the question why is a given
transistor in a computer on at the end
of a given computation
has at least two answers one is that it
is on because the electrons in the
computer were
set in such and such initial conditions
the other is that it is on because the
computer performed a computation to find
the factors of say
the number 15 and the on transistor is
part of the encoding of the output
3 and 5. a reductionist would discard
the latter explanation as
less fundamental because after all
factoring a number is nothing but the
electric currents in the computer
reductionism ultimately denies that the
computational description is necessary
though some reductionists may accept
that it is helpful as a matter of
discourse
but this is of course nonsense both
explanations are necessary to
understand what is happening they refer
to different
autonomous levels of explanation which
do not implicate one another
by ignoring one of them one misses
something crucial about reality
reductionism impedes progress in physics
and science in general because it
requires all explanations to conform
to certain arbitrarily predefined
criteria for instance that they refer
exclusively to microscopic particles and
their trajectories
in the example i gave earlier about
computations the explanation in terms of
microscopic particles and their initial
conditions
a electron currents in the computer is
not enough to capture the full picture
of what is going on
by factoring a given number yet
reductionists insist on dismissing
whatever does not fit into those
criteria from information and
thermodynamics to creativity and
consciousness as approximate
and thus outside the scope of science
the result is a narrow and limited view
of science
pausing there my reflection that might
even undersell things the result is a
narrow and limited view of science it
completely
dismisses the entire corpus of science
aside from fundamental physics it's
everything else is utterly
useless like there is no understanding
there in
for example evolution by natural
selection that
if you want to explain the origin of
species the only legitimate
true explanation that underlies
everything is the
equations of motion the the laws of
physics and the initial conditions
that's absurd it's absolutely absurd
that conception of science allows us to
solve
almost no problems if we want to find a
vaccine for the next virus
no one should be tempted to think what
are the
physical laws and initial conditions
even in the far distant future because
we have emergent simplicity
it won't be the most efficient way to
figure out vaccines even if we have a
supercomputer of the future
we're going to want to understand
the nature of viruses and how we can
reduce their impact upon people
over time as for what makes science rich
and
interesting as well as useful you know
these grand ideas about how
cosmology plays out over time we want to
understand the evidence that that's out
there you know almost
simultaneous with this episode i
released one on quasars
you know even something within physics
even something within
relatively fundamental physics you know
cosmology
we want to understand the origin of an
emergent physical phenomenon
as well and sometimes this requires more
than just the trajectory of the
elementary particles
sometimes it requires elementary
particles but sometimes it requires more
than that and the gathering of evidence
that goes beyond merely what the
fundamental particles are doing
okay going back to the book because
chiara talks about precisely this
and she writes there are phenomena that
cannot be fully expressed
by the traditional conception by this i
mean that physical theories and
explanations about those phenomena
can take only approximate non-exact
forms when expressed using the
traditional conceptions approach
so by restricting oneself to that
approach one cannot adequately explain
them
within science one important example of
things the traditional conception cannot
adequately capture
includes thermodynamic entities such as
those associated to particular kinds of
energy transfers
in physics they are called work and heat
the laws stating how work can be turned
into heat and vice versa
are central to things like heat engines
which which made possible the industrial
revolution
yet thermodynamics is often regarded as
only a useful approximation
not a fundamental physical theory so
heat and work are regarded
as not worthy of further explanation
because an exact physical theory about
them cannot be cast in terms of
statements about what happens
given initial conditions and laws of
motion the traditional conception has
thus given up on an exact understanding
of work and hate and similar entities
and claims to be content with the
existing problematic
approximate theories these theories as
you will see
are highly effective but only in certain
limited domains
for example to design heat engines such
as those used in cars and locomotives
however they appear to rely on various
approximations which when we consider
these laws as fundamental
become inadequate i shall explain these
laws
and how to solve them with
counterfactuals in chapter six
just pausing there my reflection there's
lots of interesting books out there on
thermodynamics if you're interested in
pursuing this in greater detail
anything by peter atkins is fantastic i
particularly enjoy
this book an introduction to
thermodynamics but he's also written
very complicated books about this
it's a standard part of anyone's the
physics degree
is to study thermodynamics work and heat
is
uh these are very interesting concepts
and i'm
looking forward to going through that
part of the book where chiara explains
in greater precision what work and heat
really are
but i can give you the the general up
until now
physics idea of these concepts
the work work is just a technical term
for the product of the force and
distance so
the if a force is applied over a
particular distance in the direction
that the force is applied as long as the
force and
the distance are in the same direction
then you've got work
this is the product of these two things
if you're pushing something further or
applying a force then you're doing
work in physics okay and so that to some
extent that makes a certain amount of
common sense that's what work is and so
when you have a heat engine when you
have a cylinder of some sort then it's
doing work because
the the gas is producing a force
on the parts of the piston over some
distance and that's the amount of work
that happens to be done
now heat heat is a complicated process
as well
is a complicated concept and we can get
right into it but peter atkins has this
wonderful idea
that heat is not the name of an entity
so it's not a fluid of some kind
he says it's not anything of any kind
it's the name of a process
so it is where energy is being
transferred from something that's hot
to something that's cooler and so you're
heating it this is causing
something to heat up and so heat
properly construed
should be used as a verb but of course
kiara is going to sharpen
all these concepts up in light of
constructive theory but we'll get there
in chapter six
and i'm going to skip a bit here where
akira mentions
what and what emergence means
the the this concept of emergent where
you
uh have something appearing in an
explanation at a higher level
beyond the laws of motion and initial
conditions beyond
basic particle physics so once an entity
starts to appear for example
a cat is emergent it's emerged out of
the
physical laws in some way shape or form
and and cats appear in explanations
animals appear in explanations
they their genes appear in explanations
as well um the chemicals appear in
explanations these things
become emergent phenomena and all this
emerging phenomena
results in levels of explanation so i'll
just read the final part here about this
idea of levels of explanation and
privileging certain levels of
explanation
and that we shouldn't presume that
emergent levels of explanation are any
less important or even fundamental
as compared to the ones about particle
physics
namely that the emergent things the
emergent
concepts objects that are out there as
chiara says quote
declaring those entities is not really
of interest to fundamental physics
the problem with this take is that all
levels of explanations
are necessary to grasp a given situation
remember the example with computation
and factoring levels of explanation work
together
like layers in a cake it is impossible
to get the cake's full flavor by
ignoring the top layers
and just sticking to the base in this
book you will be able to grasp
the flavour of the full cake by being
introduced
to counterfactuals and quote fantastic
way to
end today so we're going to grasp the
flavor of the full cake by
this concept of counterfactuals and it's
it's a wonderful way of conceiving of
physics that's no longer being about as
i said in the last
episode this single string that
stretches throughout time
this string is very very narrow it's a
single
thread that is just an aspect
of the greater whole of reality the
greater whole of reality being
all the things that could have happened
rather than just looking at what did
happen and what will happen
science should be about trying to figure
out what could have happened
and indeed what could happen if only we
have the right knowledge
so it is a grand broader
vision of science of physics
bringing together these strands in the
fabric of reality truly speaking
so that we can have a much again
broader view of how to go about
solving problems generating explanations
especially in physics but also in other
areas of science
that's where we'll end it for today
until next time
[Music]
bye
you